README.md, before:

# django-formset – Better UX for Django Forms 

`<django-formset>` is a [Webcomponent](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Web_Components)
to wrap one or more Django Forms. This webcomponent is installed together with the Django app
**django-formset**.

[![Build Status](https://github.com/jrief/django-formset/actions/workflows/pythonpackage.yml/badge.svg)]()
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/django-formset.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-formset)
[![Django versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/djversions/django-formset)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-formset)
[![Python versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/django-formset.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-formset)
[![Software license](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/django-formset.svg)](https://github.com/jrief/django-formset/blob/master/LICENSE)


## Installation

Install **django-formset** using

```shell
pip install django-formset
```

change `settings.py` to

```python
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    ...
    'formset',
    ...
]
```


## Usage

Say, we have a standard Django Form:

```python
from django.forms import forms, fields

class SubscribeForm(forms.Form):
    last_name = fields.CharField(
        label="Last name",
        min_length=2,
        max_length=50,
    )

    # ... more fields
```

when rendering to HTML and using the
[Bootstrap 5 framework](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.0/getting-started/introduction/), we wrap
that Form into the special Webcomponent `<django-formset ...>`:

```html
{% load static formsetify %}
<html>
  <head>
    <link href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.1.3/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css" rel="stylesheet">
    <script type="module" src="{% static 'formset/js/django-formset.min.js' %}"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <!-- other stuff -->
    <django-formset endpoint="{{ request.path }}">
      {% render_form form "bootstrap" field_classes="mb-2" %}
      <button type="button" click="disable -> submit -> proceed !~ scrollToError" class="btn">Submit</button>
    </django-formset>
    <!-- other stuff -->
  </body>
</html>
```

in our `urls.py` we now wire everything together:

```python
from django.urls import path
from formset.views import FormView

from .myforms import SubscribeForm


urlpatterns = [
    ...
    path('subscribe', FormView.as_view(
        form_class=SubscribeForm,
        template_name='my-subscribe-form.html',
        success_url='/success',
    )),
    ...
]
```

This renders `SubscribeForm` with a much better User Experience. We get immediate feedback if input
entered into a field is not valid. Moreover, when this form is submitted but rejected by the
server-side validation checker, errors are shown immediatly and without reloading the page. Only on
success, a new new page is loaded (or another alternative action is performed).


## Motivation

Instead of using a `<form>`-tag and include all its fields, here we wrap the complete form
inside the special Webcomponent `<django-formset>`. This allows us to communicate via Ajax with
our Django view, using the named endpoint. This means, that we can wrap multiple `<form>`-elements
into our Formset. It also means, that we now can place the Submit `<button>`-element outside of the
`<form>`-element. By doing so, we can decouple the Form's business-logic from its technical
constraint, of transferring a group of fields from and to the server. 

When designing this library, the main goal was to keep the programming interface a near as possible
to the way Django handles Forms, Models and Views.


## Some Highlights

* Before submitting, our Form is prevalidated by the browser, using the constraints we defined for
  each Django Field.
* The Form's data is send by an Ajax request, preventing a full page reload. This gives a much
  better user experience.
* Server side validation errors are sent back to the browser, and rendered near the offending
  Form Field.
* Non-field validation errors are renderer together with the form.
* CSRF-tokens are handlet trough a Cookie, hence there is no need to add that token to each form.
* Forms can be rendered for different CSS frameworks using their specific styleguides for arranging
  HTML. Currently **django-formset** includes renderers for:

  * [Bootstrap 5](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.0/forms/overview/),
  * [Bulma](https://bulma.io/documentation/form/general/),
  * [Foundation 6](https://get.foundation/sites/docs/forms.html),
  * [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) [^1]
  * [UIKit](https://getuikit.com/docs/form)

  It usually takes about 50 lines of code to create a renderer and most widgets can even be rendered
  using the default template as provided by Django. 
* It's JavaScript-framework agnostic. No external JavaScript dependencies are required. The client
  part is written in pure TypeScript and compiles to a single, portable JS-file.
* Support for all standard widgets Django currently offers. This also includes radio buttons and
  multiple checkboxes with options.
* File uploads are handled asynchrounosly. When the user opens the file dialog or drags a file into
  the form, this file then is uploaded immediatly to a temporary folder on the server. On successful
  file upload, a unique handle is returned together with a thumbnail of that file. On form
  submission, this handle then is used to access that file and move it to its final destination.
* Select boxes with too many entries, can be filtered by the server using a search query. No extra
  endpoint is required for this feature.
* Radio buttons and multiple checkboxes with only a few fields can be rendered inlined rather than
  beneath each other.
* The Submit buttons can be configured as a chain of actions. It for instance is possible to disable
  the button before submission. It also is possible to change the CSS depending on success or
  failure, add delays and specify the further proceedings. This for instance allows to specify the
  success page as a HTML link, rather than having it to hard-code inside the Django View.
* A Formset can group multiple Forms into a collection. On submission, this collection then is
  sent to the server as a group a separate entities. After all Forms have been validated, the
  submitted data is provided as a nested Python dictionary.
* Such a Form-Collection can be declared to have many Form entities of the same kind. This allows to
  create siblings of Forms, similar the Django's Admin Inline Forms. However, each of these siblings
  can contain other Form-Collections, which themselves can also be declared as siblings. This list
  of siblings can be extended or reduced using one "Add" and multiple "Remove" buttons.
* By using the special attributes `show-if="condition"`, `hide-if="condition"` or
  `disable-if="condition"` on input fields or fieldsets, one can hide or disable these marked
  fields. This `condition` can evaluate all field values of the current Formset by a Boolean
  expression.

[^1]: Tailwind is special here, since it doesn't include purpose-built form control classes out of
      the box. Instead **django-formset** offers an opinionated set of CSS classes suitable for
      Tailwind.


## Running the Demo

To get a first impression of **django-formset**, run the demo site.

```shell
cd testapp
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
./manage.py migrate
./manage.py runserver
```

Open http://localhost:8000/ in your browser. There is a list of forms for all kind of purposes.


## Documentation

Not deployed on RTD, but some documentation can be found in the `docs` folder.

Commit message:

add instructions on how to run the demo and tests

README.md, after:

# django-formset – Better UX for Django Forms 

`<django-formset>` is a [Webcomponent](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Web_Components)
to wrap one or more Django Forms. This webcomponent is installed together with the Django app
**django-formset**.

[![Build Status](https://github.com/jrief/django-formset/actions/workflows/pythonpackage.yml/badge.svg)]()
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/django-formset.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-formset)
[![Django versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/djversions/django-formset)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-formset)
[![Python versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/django-formset.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-formset)
[![Software license](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/django-formset.svg)](https://github.com/jrief/django-formset/blob/master/LICENSE)


## Installation

Install **django-formset** using

```shell
pip install django-formset
```

change `settings.py` to

```python
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    ...
    'formset',
    ...
]
```


## Usage

Say, we have a standard Django Form:

```python
from django.forms import forms, fields

class SubscribeForm(forms.Form):
    last_name = fields.CharField(
        label="Last name",
        min_length=2,
        max_length=50,
    )

    # ... more fields
```

when rendering to HTML and using the
[Bootstrap 5 framework](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.0/getting-started/introduction/), we wrap
that Form into the special Webcomponent `<django-formset ...>`:

```html
{% load static formsetify %}
<html>
  <head>
    <link href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.1.3/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css" rel="stylesheet">
    <script type="module" src="{% static 'formset/js/django-formset.min.js' %}"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <!-- other stuff -->
    <django-formset endpoint="{{ request.path }}">
      {% render_form form "bootstrap" field_classes="mb-2" %}
      <button type="button" click="disable -> submit -> proceed !~ scrollToError" class="btn">Submit</button>
    </django-formset>
    <!-- other stuff -->
  </body>
</html>
```

in our `urls.py` we now wire everything together:

```python
from django.urls import path
from formset.views import FormView

from .myforms import SubscribeForm


urlpatterns = [
    ...
    path('subscribe', FormView.as_view(
        form_class=SubscribeForm,
        template_name='my-subscribe-form.html',
        success_url='/success',
    )),
    ...
]
```

This renders `SubscribeForm` with a much better User Experience. We get immediate feedback if input
entered into a field is not valid. Moreover, when this form is submitted but rejected by the
server-side validation checker, errors are shown immediatly and without reloading the page. Only on
success, a new new page is loaded (or another alternative action is performed).


## Motivation

Instead of using a `<form>`-tag and include all its fields, here we wrap the complete form
inside the special Webcomponent `<django-formset>`. This allows us to communicate via Ajax with
our Django view, using the named endpoint. This means, that we can wrap multiple `<form>`-elements
into our Formset. It also means, that we now can place the Submit `<button>`-element outside of the
`<form>`-element. By doing so, we can decouple the Form's business-logic from its technical
constraint, of transferring a group of fields from and to the server. 

When designing this library, the main goal was to keep the programming interface a near as possible
to the way Django handles Forms, Models and Views.


## Some Highlights

* Before submitting, our Form is prevalidated by the browser, using the constraints we defined for
  each Django Field.
* The Form's data is send by an Ajax request, preventing a full page reload. This gives a much
  better user experience.
* Server side validation errors are sent back to the browser, and rendered near the offending
  Form Field.
* Non-field validation errors are renderer together with the form.
* CSRF-tokens are handlet trough a Cookie, hence there is no need to add that token to each form.
* Forms can be rendered for different CSS frameworks using their specific styleguides for arranging
  HTML. Currently **django-formset** includes renderers for:

  * [Bootstrap 5](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.0/forms/overview/),
  * [Bulma](https://bulma.io/documentation/form/general/),
  * [Foundation 6](https://get.foundation/sites/docs/forms.html),
  * [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) [^1]
  * [UIKit](https://getuikit.com/docs/form)

  It usually takes about 50 lines of code to create a renderer and most widgets can even be rendered
  using the default template as provided by Django. 
* It's JavaScript-framework agnostic. No external JavaScript dependencies are required. The client
  part is written in pure TypeScript and compiles to a single, portable JS-file.
* Support for all standard widgets Django currently offers. This also includes radio buttons and
  multiple checkboxes with options.
* File uploads are handled asynchrounosly. When the user opens the file dialog or drags a file into
  the form, this file then is uploaded immediatly to a temporary folder on the server. On successful
  file upload, a unique handle is returned together with a thumbnail of that file. On form
  submission, this handle then is used to access that file and move it to its final destination.
* Select boxes with too many entries, can be filtered by the server using a search query. No extra
  endpoint is required for this feature.
* Radio buttons and multiple checkboxes with only a few fields can be rendered inlined rather than
  beneath each other.
* The Submit buttons can be configured as a chain of actions. It for instance is possible to disable
  the button before submission. It also is possible to change the CSS depending on success or
  failure, add delays and specify the further proceedings. This for instance allows to specify the
  success page as a HTML link, rather than having it to hard-code inside the Django View.
* A Formset can group multiple Forms into a collection. On submission, this collection then is
  sent to the server as a group a separate entities. After all Forms have been validated, the
  submitted data is provided as a nested Python dictionary.
* Such a Form-Collection can be declared to have many Form entities of the same kind. This allows to
  create siblings of Forms, similar the Django's Admin Inline Forms. However, each of these siblings
  can contain other Form-Collections, which themselves can also be declared as siblings. This list
  of siblings can be extended or reduced using one "Add" and multiple "Remove" buttons.
* By using the special attributes `show-if="condition"`, `hide-if="condition"` or
  `disable-if="condition"` on input fields or fieldsets, one can hide or disable these marked
  fields. This `condition` can evaluate all field values of the current Formset by a Boolean
  expression.

[^1]: Tailwind is special here, since it doesn't include purpose-built form control classes out of
      the box. Instead **django-formset** offers an opinionated set of CSS classes suitable for
      Tailwind.


## Running the Demo

To get a first impression of **django-formset**, run the demo site.

```shell
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r testapp/requirements.txt
pip install --no-deps -e .
testapp/manage.py migrate
testapp/manage.py runserver
```

Open http://localhost:8000/ in your browser. There is a long list of forms for all kind of purposes.


### Running the tests

First you must initialize Playwright:

```shell
playwright install
```

Then run the testsuite

```shell
pytest testapp
```


## Documentation

Not deployed on RTD yet, but some documentation can be found in the `docs` folder.
