docs/source/django-formset.rst, before:

.. _django-formset:

Webcomponent ``<django-formset>``
=================================

When a form is rendered using a Django template, we must wrap it inside the webcomponent
``<django-formset>``. This component then takes care of the client-part, such as the form
validation, submission, error handling and many other features.

A mandatory attribute of each web component ``<django-formset>`` is its ``endpoint``. This is the
URL pointing onto a Django view and is where the client-part communicate with the server.
Typically that endpoint is connected to a :class:`formset.views.FormView`. We can either
inherit from that class and specialize into our own view class

.. code-block:: python

	from formset.views import FormView
	
	class RegisterPersonFormView(FormView):
	    template_name = 'path/to/register-person-form.html'
	    form_class = RegisterPersonForm
	    success_url = '/success'

or use that class directly in ``urls.py`` while defining the routing:

.. code-block:: python

	urlpatterns = [
	    ...
	    path('register-person', FormView.as_view(
	        template_name='path/to/register-person-form.html',
	        form_class=RegisterPersonForm,
	        success_url = '/success',
	    )),
	    ...
	]

In this example, the endpoint would point onto ``/register-person``, but in order to make our form
rendering templates reusable, we'd rather write

.. code-block:: django

	<django-formset endpoint="{{ request.path }}" force-submission="..." withhold-messages="...">
	  ...
	</django-formset>

We can do this, because the endpoint is located on the same URL as the view rendering the form.

An optional attribute to our web component ``<django-formset>`` is ``force-submission``. By setting
this to ``true``, we can force a submission to the server, even if the form did not validate on the
client side. This attribute defaults to ``false``, meaning that forms, which did not validate
can not be submitted to the server.

Another optional attribute to our web component ``<django-formset>`` is ``withhold-messages``. By
setting this to ``true``, we can withhold validation error messages until the user submits the form.
This attribute defaults to ``false``, meaning that a field validation error message is shown
immediatly after the user blurs a field containig invalid data.

Non-field errors need more logic and are always computed on the server.

Commit message:

refactor withhold-messages -> withhold-feedback=“messages”

docs/source/django-formset.rst, after:

.. _django-formset:

Webcomponent ``<django-formset>``
=================================

When a form is rendered using a Django template, we must wrap it inside the webcomponent
``<django-formset>``. This component then takes care of the client-part, such as the form
validation, submission, error handling and many other features.

A mandatory attribute of each web component ``<django-formset>`` is its ``endpoint``. This is the
URL pointing onto a Django view and is where the client-part communicate with the server.
Typically that endpoint is connected to a :class:`formset.views.FormView`. We can either
inherit from that class and specialize into our own view class

.. code-block:: python

	from formset.views import FormView
	
	class RegisterPersonFormView(FormView):
	    template_name = 'path/to/register-person-form.html'
	    form_class = RegisterPersonForm
	    success_url = '/success'

or use that class directly in ``urls.py`` while defining the routing:

.. code-block:: python

	urlpatterns = [
	    ...
	    path('register-person', FormView.as_view(
	        template_name='path/to/register-person-form.html',
	        form_class=RegisterPersonForm,
	        success_url = '/success',
	    )),
	    ...
	]

In this example, the endpoint would point onto ``/register-person``, but in order to make our form
rendering templates reusable, we'd rather write

.. code-block:: django

	<django-formset endpoint="{{ request.path }}" force-submission withhold-feedback="...">
	  ...
	</django-formset>

We can do this, because the endpoint is located on the same URL as the view rendering the form.

An optional attribute to our web component ``<django-formset>`` is ``force-submission``. By adding
this attribute, we can force a submission to the server, even if the form did not validate on the
client side. The default is to always validate all forms on the client, and only if that succeeds,
proceed with the submission to the server.

Another optional attribute to our web component ``<django-formset>`` is ``withhold-feedback``. By
setting this to ``messages``, ``errors``, ``warnings``, ``success``, or any combination of thereof,
we can withhold the feedback immediatly shown after the user types into a field or whenever a field
looses focus.

Adding ``messages`` to ``withhold-feedback="..."`` means, that the error messages below the field
will not be rendered when the user blurs a field with invalid data. 

Adding ``errors`` to ``withhold-feedback="..."`` means, that the border does not change color
(usually red) and the field does not show an alert symbol, when the user blurs a field with invalid
data. 

Adding ``warning`` to ``withhold-feedback="..."`` means, that the field does not show a warning
symbol (usually orange), when a field has focus, but its content does not contain valid data. If
only ``errors`` has been added to ``withhold-feedback="..."``, then the warning symbol will remain
even if the field looses focus.

Adding ``success`` to ``withhold-feedback="..."`` means, that the border does not change color
(usually green) and the field does not show an success symbol, when the user blurs a field with
valid data. 

The attribute ``withhold-feedback="..."`` only has effect while editing the form fields. Whenever
the user clicks onto the submit button of a form containing invalid data, then all fields which
did not validate will show their error message and set a red border.

Non-field errors need more logic and are always computed on the server.
